---
title: "Ftrace"
date: 2022-11-30T08:34:30-04:00
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - ftrace
  - linux
  - tracing
  - debug
---

# Ftrace

Ftrace is a powerfull tracing tool for the linux kernel.

It allows to trace events raised in the kernel using a special filesystem called tracefs. Events are certain points in the kernel code that write to the trace buffer if activated but are a nop if disabled. Writes to the trace buffer are blazing fast and allow us to trace without changing the timings in the kernel to much.

## Enabling the tracefs

If the correct config switches are set you should be able to see the tracefs in /proc/filesystems. If not check you kernel config for:

- CONFIG_FTRACE
- CONFIG_FUNCTION_TRACER
- CONFIG_FUNCTION_GRAPH_TRACER
- CONFIG_DYNAMIC_TRACEV

You should then be able to mount it using:

`mount -t tracefs nodev /sys/kernel/tracefs`

or to alternatively add an entry to `/etc/fstab`:

` tracefs       /sys/kernel/tracing       tracefs defaults        0       0`

If the tracefs is mounted you can find it in /sys/kernel/tracefs.

## Using the tracefs

Change to the `/sys/kernel/tracing` directory and you will find different files and directories that allow you to configure the tracer as well as to read the trace output.

You can get a full list of tracers and traceable events by reading the files `available_tracers` and `available_events`.

You can configure the events that should be traced in the `events` folder.  Every event has its own subfolder with some configuration files.

`echo 1 > /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/events/sched/sched_switch/enable`

Will enable the sched_switch event.

To enable the tracer use `echo 1 > tracing_on`. You can disable the tracer by sending a 0 to `tracing_on`.

To read the content of the trace buffer read the `trace` file.

`echo > trace` will clear the trace buffer.

cat per_cpu/cpu2/trace

* There is also trace-cmd but you do not have to use it

* swapper process is the idle task

* trace_printk

## Sources

[1] [ftrace - Function Tracer — The Linux Kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/trace/ftrace.html)

[2] [realtime:documentation:howto:tools:ftrace [Wiki]](https://wiki.linuxfoundation.org/realtime/documentation/howto/tools/ftrace)

[3] [http://embeddedguruji.blogspot.com/2019/01/debugging-linux-kernel-using-ftrace.html](http://embeddedguruji.blogspot.com/2019/01/debugging-linux-kernel-using-ftrace.html)
